+++
title = "Adressing in Real Mode in x86"
date = "2015-04-14"
+++

I am planning to write a bunch of posts about memory and x86 architecture and
virtualization. This is the first post among hopefully many which will deep
dive into the x86 architecture. 

In this post I will cover about the real mode which is the default mode that
x86 runs in when it boots up. This was the default mode before intel introduced
paging in the [80286](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/80286). In real mode, all
registers are 16 bits and the processor can adress upto 20-bits of address
space giving \\( 2^{20} -1 \approx 1M \\) addressable bytes. Although it should be
possible to address all 4G of memory (16 bit segment and 16 bit offset), the
hardare at the time had only 20 address pins hence they were restricted to a
20-bit address in real mode.  All the addresses are directly mapped to physical
memory with no protection. Accessing memory beyond the 1M limit causes a
wraparound which some ill-thinking developers used as a feature. 

These 20-bit address are accessed using a combination of segment address and
offset (logical address).  To get a physical address, the 16-bit segement
address is sifted left 4 bits and a 16-bit offset is added to it making a total
of 20-bit address.


Let us look at a sample instruction and see how it works in real mode. 


```bash

mov ax, [080h]

```

The above instruction copies the value present at the logical address `0x80` to
the `ax` register.

![Segment addressing](https://www.dropbox.com/s/nbz3os9fbawkr39/real_mode_addressing.png?raw=1 "Segment addressing in real mode")

The figure above shoes how the final physical address is calculated. If no
register is given, the `DS` register is chosen as the segment register which
decides which `64k` segment we are working with. The value in the `DS` is
multiplied by 16 and added to the immidiate value `0x80` which is the offset in
the segment, to get the final physicial address. If `DS` contained `0x100` then
the physical address will be

$$ 0\mathtt{X}100*4 + 0\mathtt{X}80 = 0\mathtt{X}480 $$

## High Memory Area

Now there is a corner case if you set the segement selector to 0xFFFF you can
start accessing memory from 16 bytes below the `1M` limit and go beyond `1M`
upto (64 - 16) 48 bytes.  In the `segment:offset`  `FFFF:0000` to `FFFF:FFFF`
This is the high memory area. In older processors, this would wrap around as
they only had 20 address lines and this is a 21 bit address but you could
access the high memory in newer models. To maintain backward compatibility with
the older real mode, the wraparound was emulated and was controlled by setting
the [A20](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A20_line) line.
